Participants:

Bettina

Julia

Max

Fahad

Maria

Ilan

Thierry

John

 1.
        Relating word-forms to lexical entries (already discussed)

ex:play_v a ontolex:LexicalEntry ;

ontolex:canonicalForm ex:play ,

    ontolex:otherForm ex:plays ,

    ontolex:otherForm ex:played ,

    ontolex:otherForm ex:playing .

All word-forms of a lexical entry can be stated by using ontolex:canonicalFom
and ontolex:otherForm.

 2.
        Relating morphs to forms via new property

morph:consistsOf

definition: This property states into which Morph resources a Form resource can
be segmented.

domain: ontolex:Form

range: morph:Morph

ex:plays_3_sg a ontolex:Form ;

morph:consistsOf ex:Stem_play , ex:Suffix_s_3_sg .

ex:Stem_play a morph:StemMorph .

ex:Suffix_s_3_sg a morph:AffixMorph .

Form instances can be decomposed into inflectional elements or phonological
stem alternants but never into elements that entail a lexical meaning (i.e.
derivational affixes or parts of compounds).

John example: deiontic affixes ‘wanting, being able to do something’ could be
modelled as derivational and inflectional affixes

 3.
        Assigning forms to inflectional paradigms

Ontolex:morphologicalPattern adaption extending the domain with Ontolex:Form?

The entirety of all inflectional tables in a Wiktionary verb entry for instance
is regarded to be a morphological pattern. The single tables represent separate
inflectional paradigms. Model paradigms, create a connection to morphological
pattern and to ontolex:Form

 4.
        Representing ordering of elements in lexical entries and morphs in
        forms

CC: segmentation ordering via dedicated properties rather than rdf list
property, :next property

JM: Other options are RDF Seqs and RDF Lists, see https://www.w3.org/TR/
rdf-schema/#ch_containervocab

Thierry: we are using RDF:_1, RDF:_2 (or so) in the decomp module

 5.
        Surface representation of morph:Morph resources

e.g. datatype property morph:representation

 6.
        Definition of morph:Morph

mmoon:Morph definition:

A morph is a concrete realization of a single morpheme which usually results
from segmentation.

Haspelmath and Sims 2013: Understanding Morphology:

Morph: A concrete primitive element of morphological analysis.

Lehmann:Lido: definition of ‘morph’

A morph is an uncategorized smallest meaningful unit as resulting from
segmentation. It manifests the morpheme.

Lehmann:Lido: definition of ‘morpheme’:

A morpheme is a smallest linguistic sign, i.e. a smallest unit that is
semantically distinct from all other signs of the language.

Delimitation and History:

The significance of the two conditions of the definition is as follows:

1) A morpheme is irreducible to smaller significative units; i.e. what results
if it is segmented may only be distinctive units. This condition distinguishes
it from larger units, esp. the word.

2) To be distinct from all other morphemes of the language, it isn’t allowed to
be in complementary distribution or free variation with another morpheme. This
condition distinguishes it from the morph.

Glottopedia Entry for ‘Morph’

Morph is a term which refers to alternative forms or realizations of a single
morpheme.

Example:

the English plural suffix is found in precisely three different
pronounciations, /s/, /z/, and /@z/: cats /kats/, dogs /dogz/, and horses /
ho:s@z/. Since these three elements all represent a single morpheme, they are
called morphs, and we say that /s/, /z/, and /@z/ are allomorphs of the
abstract or underspecified plural suffix /-Z/.

University Düsseldorf Glossary entry for ‘Morph’:

Any item of language which cannot be broken down any further without a loss of
meaning. A morph usually realises a morpheme, the unit of grammar on an
abstract level, e.g. /ʌn/ in undoable but also /ɪm/ in impossible.

Discussion for the definition of morph:Morph:

It must clearly state that the instances of this class cannot be lexical
entries. This is what distinguishes it from ontolex:Affix which could otherwise
be a subclass of morph:Morph. I would also avoid to reduce it to inflectional
morphs because it hinders the description of phonological alternations that can
be involved in forming word-forms with morph:Morph resources.

