Participants:

Bettina

Thierry

Christian

Julia

Francesca

Fahad

[image1]

Representing the lexical entries of which a derived word (as a lexical entry)
consists:

ex:lex_driver a ontolex:LexicalEntry ;

proposal:consistsOfLexEntry ex:lex_drive , ex:lex_er .

consistsOfLexEntry for decomposing lexical entries, which can only consist of
other lexical entries (not of morphs).

Domain: ontolex:LexicalEntry

Range: ontolex:LexicalEntry

Note: The elements of which a lexical entry consists should be also lexical
entries. Equivalently there could be a consistsOfMorphEntry object property for
stating of which morph resources ontolex:Form (i.e. wordforms in inflectional
paradigms) consist.

Decomp:constituent

Definition: The property constituent relates a lexical entry or component to a
component that it is constituted by.

Domain: LexicalEntry or Component

Range: Component

decomp:Component

Definition: A component is a particular realization of a lexical entry that
forms part of a compound lexical entry.

Bettina: the consistsOfLexEntry should interrelate also other parts (i.e.
derivational affixes) and not only a “particular realization of a lexical entry
that forms part of a compound lexical entry”

Christian: compound is used more technically here, would reuse
decomp:constituent

Thierry: is also ok with decomp:constituent

Francesca: for NLP users it is confusing to have compounds composed of
morphemes (de-compounding is a specific task)

Thierry: maybe adjust the existing decomp model?! To describe more encompassing
properties.

Christian: agrees with Thierry (roughly: vocabulary needs to be consolidated in
the end, and existing terminology has to take priority, not for the moment,
though)

Fahad: hasAffix, has Root etc. instead of concepts?

Christian: We need an explicit subproperty for zero derivations. As RDF
operates under the OWA, we have no other way to make sure a derivRel with only
one known consistsOfLexEntry doesn't have more than one.

Bettina: Do you like to have a subproperty of derivRel or
consistsOfLexicalEntry?? I think for zero morphs it would be sufficient to use
consistsOfLexical entry with a zero morph Morph instance in the object slot.

Fahad: it might be an idea to have more specific properties such as hasRoot and
hasAffix/prefix/suffix/infix here instead of the rather generic
consistsOfLexEntry

Stating that a derived word is derived from another (derived) word:

Ex:lex_driverless a ontolex:LexicalEntry ;

proposal:derivRel ex:lex_driver .

derivRel subPropertyof vartrans:lexicalRel

vartrans:lexicalRel

Definition: The lexicalRel property relates two lexical entries that stand in
some lexical relation.

Domain: ontolex:LexicalEntry

Range: ontolex:LexicalEntry

Note: The lexical entry in the subject slot is alway the derivative of the
lexical entry in the object slot.

Christian: as the note indicates, the naming needs to be improved. Can we go
for derivedFrom?

Julia: agrees, because position of subject and object slot matter

Christian: derivedFrom can still be a subproperty of vartrans:lexicalRel
(doesn’t inherit symmetry)

Christian: could also be a subProperty of consistsOfLexEntry. The latter
provides all morphemes, this one only the morphological nucleus

Relating selected inflectional affixes to lexical entries (related to N12):

Suggestion 2 (Bettina): link the lexical entry to specific inflectional morphs:

ex:lex_driver proposal:lexicalMorph ex:suffix_s_plural .

Example: Many dictionaries contain information about the morphology, this is
typically given relative to the lemma, e..g., (from "Langenscheidt
Taschenwörterbuch Deutsch als Fremdsprache")

  • 
        Bedingung die; -, -en

  • 
        Bedürfnis das; -ses, -se

  • 
        Beitrag der; -(e)s, Beiträge

lexicalMorph as new property

Domain: ontolex:LexicalEntry

Range: proposal:Morph

Note: This property is suggested to enable the plain enumeration of selected
inflectional morphs that are usually directly given behind the headword
indicating with which affixes certain wordforms are built. It does not make any
statement about the exact position of the affix within the stem or potential
spelling or pronunciation changes that these affixes my cause to the stem.

John: I don't think this (ex:suffix_s_plural) should be a form, it is a Morph,
right?

Bettina: yes, it should be a morph and in reply to Christian, it is not
intended to be a resource of the type ontolex:Form. Therefore, I suggest to
have it as a new property with the domain and range defined as above.

Julia: would like to separate that information (lexicograph. convention) from
lexical level and split it up to wordforms and then specify the affixes

  • 
        This kind of recording information could be described with the lexicog
        module (for recording the stuff you don’t want to lose) - add a usage
        recommendation to use lexicog module for people who like to keep this
        kind of information. And go for full wordform listings as default case
        (--> but how do we record -(e)s as genitive ending if we don’t generate
        the final form?)

Thierry: linking the full wordforms to the lexical entry instead of selected
affixes

Fahad: distinguish intensional and extensional morphology as in LMF

Julia: as label to a lexicog:Entry (~intensional, but not machine-readable)

Others: all forms listed (= extensional)

Christian: could the machine-readable way of capturing this information be a
MorphologicalPattern? Definition of MP to be clarified, though.

