Participants:

Bettina Klimek (BK)

Jakub Šimek

Matteo Pellegrini

Julia Bosque-Gil (UNIZAR)

Stefania Racioppa (DFKI)

Max Ionov (GUF)

Fahad Khan (CNR)

 1.
        Module draft 4.1

[image1]

Adaptions of module draft 4.1 to be included for next telco:

  • 
        insert morph:generates from moprh:InflectionRule to ontolex:Form

  • 
        property morph:evokes with morph:Morph in domain and
        ontolex:LexicalConcept (DerivationalConcept as subclass) in range

  • 
        property morph:sense with morph:Morph in domain and
        ontolex:LexicalSense in range

      □ 
            JBG> With the use of ontolex:LexicalSense we are assuming an
            ontological reference, so we might run into the same problems as
            the ones we found when converting dictionaries (which ontological
            references to point to?). Since in the lexicog specification we
            opted to stick to ontolex:LexicalConcepts for the meaning of
            lexical entries in the conversion of dict entries to LLD, why would
            we want to point to LexicalSense in this case, instead of Concept?

 2. Vocabulary for N4: Inflectional paradigm

    Proposed definitions as of telco from 10.12.2019

Classes

morph:Paradigm

A class that represents a theoretically motivated type of declination, e.g.

  • 
        “a” stem declension in Latin

  • 
        First declension in Russian

May contain metadata information about this type of declination.

Book analogy: a full paradigm table with possible allomorphy/alternative
variants

morph:InflectionType

A class that represents a single slot for a single grammatical category for all
its possible values (e.g. all the cases)

Book analogy: a column from a paradigm table without allomorphy/alternative
variants for just a single morpheme

morph:Rule

A class containing necessary information to add one morpheme to a single word
form. It must contain either morph:example or morph:replacement (or both).
“Tabular” value of a morpheme must be stored in rdfs:label (e.g. “-s”@en for
usual PL in English)

Properties

morph:paradigm

Domain: morph:InflectionType

Range: morph:Paradigm

A link to the paradigm for the inflection type

morph:example

Domain: morph:Rule

Range: string literal

A single generated form that was generated using this rule

morph:next

Domain: morph:InflectionType

Range: morph:InflectionType

Links two consecutive inflection types (“slots”), e.g. number and case in
Finnish

morph:inflects

Domain: ontolex:Word

Range: morph:InflectionType

A link to the first “slot” (inflection type), e.g. an inflection type for
number for English nouns

morph:inflectionType

Domain: morph:Rule

Range: morph:InflectionType

morph:replacement

Domain: morph:Rule

Range: [morph:source, morph:target, both are string literals]

morph:generates

Domain: morph:Rule

Range: unrestricted?

BK: currently missing in draft image, does the inflection rule generate the
ontolex:Form resources? yes

3. Representation needs modeling

modeled as draft:

N11: Meanings of stems and roots

BK proposal: The description of meanings of stems and roots could be realized
in the same way as the description of meanings of lexical entries as given in
ontolex. For the representation of roots maybe external resources such as
Concepticon could be recommended or the possibility of a plain textual
definition could be established in addition.

Extend domain of ontolex:sense: domain: ontolex:LexicalEntry and
morph:StemMorph and morph:RootMorph

JMC: not in favour of extending ontolex:sense domain with morph:Morph, proposes
new property morph:sense with ontolex:LexicalSense and another Concept class

draft: property morph:sense with morph:Morph in domain and ontolex:LexicalSense
in range

not modeled yet:

N12: Derivational Meanings

John: Model derivational meanings as concepts and link morph instances to this
concept.

Fahad: Ignore examples with lexicalized words (e.g. computer). We do not need
to model too deeply - just state “diminutive”.

John: Proposes to have DerivationalConcept as subclass of ontolex:Concept (but
no need for InflectionalConcept subclass).

property morph:evokes with morph:Morph in domain and ontolex:LexicalConcept
(DerivationalConcept as subclass) in range

N5: Morphology crosses part-of-speech boundaries (derivation)

BK proposal: use established means for derivation to represent conversion and
specify zero morph, e.g. “play” (noun):

ex:lex_play_noun ontolex:lexicalForm ex:form_play_noun_sg .

ex:form_play_noun_sg morph:consistOf morph:ZeroMorph .

WFL: implemented alternative option by creating wfl:ConversionRelation with no
zero morph

N6: Morphs linked to Lexical Entries

BK proposal: created object property morph:morphologicalForm (in parallel to
ontolex:lexicalForm) with domain ontolex:LexicalEntry and range morph:Morph

→ different positions on whether this should be representable in the module at
all because all information/data is already covered with the vocabulary and it
is a need of space-restricted print dictionaries - discuss again later

