Link: https://meet.google.com/pvq-hxqi-arr [check here for link updates if it
doesn’t work]

Latest Definitions: https://github.com/ontolex/morph/blob/master/draft.md

Nexus: https://nexuslinguarum.eu/the-action/join-us

[CC: apparently, Max needs to let us in

I created a new gmeet NOW]

Participants [please add yourself]:

Christian Chiarcos (CC)

Max Ionov (MI)

Katerina Gkirtzou (KG)

Fahad Khan (FK) (excused: 20 min late)

Khadija Ait ElFqih (KAE) – excused

Matteo Pellegrini (MP)

Ciprian-Octavian Truică (CT)

Penny Labropoulou (PL)

Elena Simona Apostol (ESA)

Sina Ahmadi (SA)

Elena Benzoni (EB)

Petra Steiner (PS)

Theodorus Fransen (TF)

Thierry Declerck (DFKI)

Ranka Stanković

Gilles Sérasset (GS)

0. Module draft (4.17)

[image1]

Updates:

  • 
        Domain of baseConstraint and grammaticalMeaning now includes morph:Rule

  • 
        New section: https://github.com/ontolex/morph/blob/master/draft.md#
        overall-structure

1. Publications

LLODream postproceedings

deadline 01.12, post-presentation publication

Consensus: wait with an overview until model is stable

MWE Chapter

  • 
        Initiated in FrAC

  • 
        Doodle poll: https://doodle.com/meeting/participate/id/dyrZg8ze

  • 
        Draft for chapter: https://www.overleaf.com/8285444258rpfnbwgwbrdp

  • 
        Template: https://www.overleaf.com/latex/templates/
        langsci-skeleton-for-edited-volumes-2022-06/vvjbpxnrbnkk, chapters/
        01.tex

  • 
        Initial abstract: https://docs.google.com/document/d/
        1HLTsYScMiZE4Nb6b7mozN-SoKAIWtisdiKLa0OoXPuU/edit?usp=sharing

  • 
        Slack channel: #frac-mwe-chapter

  • 
        authors: CC KG MI BK FK CT EA (TD can also contribute, we have been
        doing some work on MWE in Elexis)

  • 
        TODO@CC: Doodle poll for next call

eLex 2023

https://elex.link/elex2023/

Submission deadline: 31.01.2023

Dates: 27.06-29.06

Topic tbd:

  • 
        Overview of the model

      □ 
            LREC was just dynamic part

      □ 
            Focus on changes since the last presentation

          ☆ 
                Inflection type, grammatical meaning changed

          ☆ 
                Descriptive part: morph

  • 
        Use case: Semitic? [if we have a consensus on that]

      □ 
            Probably too late

  • 
        Abstract only, paper later

  • 
        Topic to be decided at next call

2. Handling of Semitic languages [postponed]

Postponed, need Khadija to join (excused today)

3. Interlinking Latin Language Data in the Linguistic Linked Open Data

  • 
        Thierry STSM@CIRCSE/LiLa Sep-Oct 2022

  • 
        Focus on morphology, esp. with Marco Passarotti and Matteo

  • 
        Issue: linking with the corpus is problematic if corpus words are not
        disambiguated (semantically and grammatically)

      □ 
            Introduced underspecified forms (multiple lexinfo values for the
            same lexinfo property, e.g. lexinfo:case)

      □ 
            Suggestion: class morph:UnderspecifiedMorph as a subclass of
            ontolex:Form (?)

          ☆ 
                Matteo: yes, maybe better morph:UnderspecifiedForm?

  • 
        Issue: frequency counts for fully and partially disambiguated morphs

      □ 
            Suggestion: use morph:UnderspecifiedMorph, as well

      □ 
            Should be a FrAC Observable (“underspecified observable”)

  • 
        Tbc: do we need fully specified lexical entries in the model?

      □ 
            If not, this class would be nice to have

  • 
        Blog post

      □ 
            Draft restricted, so far, TODO@TD: provide a public link

  • 
        Gilles: rather classical problem, any examples with multiple
        underspecified dimensions

      □ 
            Same problem for Greek, Serbian, German (also Latin), e.g.,
            number+case combinations

          ☆ 
                Post-call: Russian кушанье “food”, gen.sg.=nom.pl=acc.pl
                кушанья (gen.pl кушаний, nom.sg.=akk.sg. кушанье)

              ○ 
                    Serbian:
                    1) predikcija “prediction”; predikcija (gen.pl.=nom.sg.),
                    predikcije (nom.pl.=acc.pl.=voc.pl.=gen.sg.)
                    2) doteran “polished”, adjective; form doterana
                    (nom.sg.fem.=voc.sg.fem.= gen.pauk.masc.=acc.pauk.masc.=
                    nom.pl.neut.=voc.pl.neut.) ;

      □ 
            Matteo: link forms to bundles of features (=> GrammaticalMeaning
            [s], optionally with lexinfo feats)

  • 
        Christian:

      □ 
            possibly forms can be underspecified in OntoLex (cf. one form for
            multiple lexical entries [not forbidden], forms in lexical
            resources that don’t disambiguate morphological features]); then,
            no new class needed

      □ 
            Possibly to be modelled with frac:Observable, cf. corpus queries
            (not fully discussed yet)

          ☆ 
                Gilles: not limited to FrAC use cases, but general feature of
                lexical resources; also not limited to morphology

          ☆ 
                Matteo: problem in the definition of ontolex:Form? [just string
                or string+features? Both definitions occur]

      □ 
            Question: do we need a specific class?

          ☆ 
                Thierry: was introduced for readability

          ☆ 
                Christian: We can infer underspecification from having multiple
                grammatical meanings

          ☆ 
                Matteo: in Lila helpful, but can be user class, useful feature
                is to state that something is unambiguous

          ☆ 
                Christian: model by property morph:soleGrammaticalMeaning (must
                be unique per form)

          ☆ 
                Matteo: or, specify at observable? Doesn’t necessarily require
                an extension of morph

      □ 
            Telco link: https://meet.google.com/whn-efaq-cha

      □ 
            TODO@MP: small data example

4. Definitions

See https://github.com/ontolex/morph/blob/master/draft.md and https://
github.com/ontolex/morph/issues .

Postponed

5. AoB ?

Thierry: Cost Action UniDive on MWEs, Universal Dependencies etc.: https://
www.cost.eu/actions/CA21167/

  • 
        Overlap: Thierry, Ranka, Christian

  • 
        Meetings yet to happen

  • 
        Thierry: reached out to establish ties between Nexus and UnIDive

