Participants:

Bettina

Thierry

Fahad

Maria

Ilan

Max

Julia

John

Adrian

Modelling Paradigms

[image1]

ontolex:morphologicalPattern: The morphological pattern property indicates the
morphological class of a word. Domain: LexicalEntry

Example code from OntoLex-Lemon specification:

:amare ontolex:morphologicalPattern :latin_regular_conjugation ;

ontolex:canonicalForm :amare_form .

:amare_form ontolex:writtenRep "amare"@la .

:videre ontolex:morphologicalPattern :latin_second_conjugation ;

ontolex:canonicalForm :videre_form .

:videre_form ontolex:writtenRep "videre"@la

Example code for proposal:

:amare ontolex:morphologicalPattern :latin_regular_conjugation ;

ontolex:canonicalForm :amare_form ;

ontolex:otherForm :amo_form ,:amas_form ,:amat_form .

:amo_form morph:hasParadigm :present_indicative_active .

:present_indicative_active a morph:InflectionalParadigm ;

morph:belongsToMorphPattern :latin_regular_conjugation .

Modelling inflectional, derivational, etymological morph via values

Proposal:

  • 
        Create morph:Morph_value class for the three instances

  • 
        Creating three individuals morph:inflectional, morph:derivational,
        morph:etymological as values

  • 
        Create property morph:has_morph_status

:Morph_value

a owl:Class ;

[DEL:owl:equivalentClass:DEL]

[DEL:[ a owl:Class ;:DEL]

[DEL:owl:oneOf (:inflectional :derivational :etymological):DEL]

[DEL:]:DEL] .

:inflectional

a :Morph_value ;

owl:differentFrom :derivational [DEL:, :etymological:DEL] .

:derivational

a :Morph_value ;

owl:differentFrom :inflectional [DEL:, :etymological:DEL] .

[DEL::etymological:DEL]

[DEL:a :Morph_value ;:DEL]

[DEL:owl:differentFrom :inflectional , :derivational .:DEL]

:has_morph_status

a owl:ObjectProperty , owl:FunctionalProperty ;

rdfs:domain :Morph , ontolex:Affix.

rdfs:range :Morph_value .

English comparative suffix -er:

:Suffix_er a morph:SuffixMorph ;

:has_morph_status morph:inflectional .

Defining morph:Morph

mmoon:Morph definition:

A morph is a concrete realization of a single morpheme which usually results
from segmentation.

Haspelmath and Sims 2013: Understanding Morphology:

Morph: A concrete primitive element of morphological analysis.

Lehmann:Lido: definition of ‘morph’

A morph is an uncategorized smallest meaningful unit as resulting from
segmentation. It manifests the morpheme.

Lehmann:Lido: definition of ‘morpheme’:

A morpheme is a smallest linguistic sign, i.e. a smallest unit that is
semantically distinct from all other signs of the language.

Delimitation and History:

The significance of the two conditions of the definition is as follows:

1) A morpheme is irreducible to smaller significative units; i.e. what results
if it is segmented may only be distinctive units. This condition distinguishes
it from larger units, esp. the word.

2) To be distinct from all other morphemes of the language, it isn’t allowed to
be in complementary distribution or free variation with another morpheme. This
condition distinguishes it from the morph.

Glottopedia Entry for ‘Morph’

Morph is a term which refers to alternative forms or realizations of a single
morpheme.

Example:

the English plural suffix is found in precisely three different
pronounciations, /s/, /z/, and /@z/: cats /kats/, dogs /dogz/, and horses /
ho:s@z/. Since these three elements all represent a single morpheme, they are
called morphs, and we say that /s/, /z/, and /@z/ are allomorphs of the
abstract or underspecified plural suffix /-Z/.

University Düsseldorf Glossary entry for ‘Morph’:

Any item of language which cannot be broken down any further without a loss of
meaning. A morph usually realises a morpheme, the unit of grammar on an
abstract level, e.g. /ʌn/ in undoable but also /ɪm/ in impossible.

Discussion for the definition of morph:Morph:

It must clearly state that the instances of this class cannot be lexical
entries. This is what distinguishes it from ontolex:Affix which could otherwise
be a subclass of morph:Morph. I would also avoid to reduce it to inflectional
morphs because it hinders the description of phonological alternations that can
be involved in forming word-forms with morph:Morph resources.

Max: - state that it does not carry a meaning but corresponds to meanings

Julia, John, Max, Bettina and others agreed on using Haspelmath’s definition.

Use it for now, wait until new insights, comments arise and eventually discuss
it again:

“A concrete primitive element of morphological analysis.”

  • 
        State Haspelmath as source of the definition

  • 
        Create disjoint class axiom between Morph and LexicalEntry cannot be
        lexical entries

