Developing an OntoLex Morphology Module

Telco: Jan 20, 2021

Participants:

Bettina

Christian C

Max

Matteo

Fahad Khan

Francesco

Agenda

 1.
        Status Quo

[image1]

Defined purpose and scope of the morphology module:

Purpose and scope

The morphology module aims at fulfilling two modelling purposes:

1.Stating elements that are involved in the decomposition of lexical entries
and forms.

1.1 Morphological decomposition on the lexical entry level.

scope: The kind of elements of which a lexical entry can consist should be as
non-restrictive as possible. I.e. The decomposition of lexical entries
encompass lexical entries, components, derivational affixes, inflectional
affixes, stems, roots and zero morphs. However, a lexical entry can NEVER be
composed of a form!

1.2 Morphological decomposition on the form level.

scope: Elements of which a form can consist include roots, stems, inflectional
affixes and zero morphs. A form can NEVER be decomposed into lexical entries
(including ontolex:Affix), components and forms.

Points 1.1 and 1.2 have been finished to a preliminary status according to the
paper: https://elex.link/elex2019/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/eLex_2019_33.pdf

Do we need to discuss all classes and properties again?

Shall I create a questionnaire to find out which class and property definitions
need to be reevaluated?

2. Enabling the representation of building patterns that are involved in the
formation of lexical entries and forms.

2.1 Representation of decompositional building patterns for lexical entries.

2.2 Representation of decompositional building patterns for forms.

Point 2.2 was discussed with different examples but is not finished.

Point 2.1 still needs to be modeled.

Current status?: https://docs.google.com/document/d/
1nzcxiyBfKe5rRWrur-gmOzqFaginfydDPR7uFlPtjHo/edit?usp=sharing

 2.
        Future Workflow

Define new Workflow for finishing module development

 1.
        Finish modeling proposal that addresses all modeling needs

     a.
            Finish collection and evaluation of modeling needs

     b.
            Finish modeling of purpose 2.1 and 2.2 according to modeling needs

 2.
        Apply test datasets for every vocabulary element

 3.
        Refine model

 4.
        Repeat step 2 and 3 until each vocabulary element is used at least for
        modeling 2 resources

 5.
        Create specification document

 3.
        Editing of the specification document

https://github.com/ontolex/morph/blob/master/index.html

Who will contribute to the editing of the specification document?

Shall we start writing already? - slowly with Google doc for collaborative
editing, later move to markup and git document - only a few people (to be
decided) transfer the Google doc to its final git file.

https://ontolex.github.io/morph/

 4.
        Remaining modeling needs

Decide on N 1 - N20 here: https://www.w3.org/community/ontolex/wiki/Morphology#
Purpose_and_scope

Collect more with regard to purpose 2.1 and 2.2?

Tasks for next telco:

  • 
        All:Collect more modeling needs with regard to purpose 2.1 and 2.2

Modelling needs to be added to be Wiki:

    4 ways to represent infected word-forms

 1.
        rules with transformations(Max)

 2.
        Inflection Tables with full inflected word form(Max)

 3.
        set of affixes/word endings (Max)

 4.
        Assimilation rules as additional rules on top of 1.

  • 
        All: Collect test data here https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/
        1hNOj5qm34J7uGJrsudI4eDuQAMCFFfzv?usp=sharing

  • 
        Bettina: Prepare vocabulary description document* https://
        docs.google.com/document/d/1r6P9pTibsIy1iug1ptRtI-h9oVoA9N2wwDJJVaXt56s
        /edit?usp=sharing

*edit this document to work on vocabulary and address these questions: Do we
need to discuss all classes and properties again?

Shall I create a questionnaire to find out which class and property definitions
need to be reevaluated?

  • 
        Bettina: Update modelling needs and decision results in Wiki

  • 
        Max: prepare latest diagram of vocabulary for purpose 2.2 with
        respective vocabulary definitions

  • 
        Bettina: Prepare modelling need google doc to share

  • 
        Bettina: Prepare specification as Google doc to share with everyone who
        likes to be author

  • 
        Fahad + CC + Bettina: Bettina to write invitation mail to be sent out
        to NexusLinguarum to participate and share language resources

  • 
        Bettina: add morphological language types that are supposed to be
        covered with the morph module to the definition of the scope in the
        Wiki (most frequent morphological phenomena but also try to aim at
        representing languages which are morphologically very complex, e.g. CCs
        sample data for an eskimo language)

Mail to Nexus Linguarum

Dear Nexus Linguarum researchers,

we are reaching out to you to invite you to participate in the development of
the new OntoLex-lemon Morphology Module.

After a longer break, the regular work on the module has been taken up again
with the first telco last Wednesday. This module pursues to enable the
representation of morphological language data by addressing computational
linguistic as well as language descriptive needs. Moreover, it aims at allowing
for the automatic generation of inflectional paradigms and word-forms of
lexemes and the generation of lexemes that result from word-formation
processes.

A preliminary report of the current modeling status can be consulted here:

https://elex.link/elex2019/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/eLex_2019_33.pdf

Right now we are working on the modeling draft for the automatic generation of
inflected word-forms and derived lexemes.

Since there is considerable overlap between the OntoLex-lemon community and
your effort we are hoping to work together in building a Morphology Module that
fulfills the modeling needs current ontologies and vocabularies lack to
express.

There are several ways of a collaborative exchange and participation in the
module development:

 1.
        You are welcome to join our bi-weekly telcos on Wednesday at 1-2 pm CET
        (the next telco will be on February, 3rd): https://meet.google.com/
        rrs-garw-oxu?hs=122&authuser=0

 2.
        We would also like to encourage you to share language data with us that
        addresses a specific modeling need you would like to be representable
        with the Morphology Module or that you like to provide as test data.

 3.
        Further ways for collaboration/participation?!

You can enter your representation needs into this document: https://
docs.google.com/document/d/1z1HjQ0_WmdQwdRoktSFPGewOkzcHesdJiz0O4CFX1Q8/edit?
usp=sharing.

For the contribution of test data please use the folder: https://
drive.google.com/drive/folders/1hNOj5qm34J7uGJrsudI4eDuQAMCFFfzv?usp=sharing.

We believe that a collaboration between our research efforts will lead to more
accurate language data as Linked Data and are looking forward to hearing back
from you soon.

Kind regards,

Christian, Fahad and Bettina

