Participants:

Bettina Klimek (BK)

Matteo Pellegrini

Jakub Šimek

Stefania Racioppa (DFKI)

 1.
        Module draft 4.2

[image1]

Adaptions of module draft 4.2 to be included for next telco:

  • 
        link morph:generates from morph:Rule to ontolex:LexicalEntry and
        ontolex:Form

  • 
        link morph:example and morph:replacement to morph:Rule

2. Representation needs modeling

not modeled yet:

N7: Multiple segmentation strategies

The segmentation of lexical entries or wordforms varies with different
granularity:

German verb jagte "hunted"

Complete segmentation: root-stem-suffix

[[[jag]-t]-e] - [[[root]tense suffix]number suffix]wordform

Contracted segmentation: stem-suffix

[[jagt]-e] - [[past tense stem]number suffix]wordform

Christian: Does occur in Splett's Old High German dictionary (https://brill.com
/view/journals/abag/42/1/article-p264_28.xml): Here, full morphological parses
(tree structures) are being used. The other (main) use case is in language
documentation (with Toolbox, from which dictionaries are being created):
Linguistic glossing can operate on a superficial level or on a deep level, cf.
German fressen ("to eat, of an animal") which superficially involves two
morphemes (fress- + -en), but on a deep level involves three (*ver- + ess- +
-en, *ver- contributing the derogative [non-human] meaning as in verwerfen
"reject", lit. "cast away"). Normally, while one dictionary may chose one level
of depth, another dictionary may chose another. Admitting more than one level
of depth allows to merge information from different sources in a coherent
representation. Wrt. morphological pattern: Isn't the idea that the
morphological pattern describes a context for one given morph(eme)? So if have
more than one (-t- and -e-) here, how will be formalize their combination?

Issue: the inflection rule forces the generation of two distinct ontolex:Form
resources with different segmentation strategies (i.e. everything that is
stated for ontolex:Form morph:consistsOf …) , but they are actually identical
resources. Solution: interconnect both ontolex:Form resources with some “has
segmentation variant” symmetric property?

3. Initial discussion of Stefania’s Latin word form generation example data

Stefania’s example to apply the vocabulary for generating ontolex:Form
resources:

WordNet Latin Lexicon:

,base,forms,uri,pos,number,gender,case,group,stem,degree

25,abdicatio,abdication,a0031,noun,singular,feminine,nominative,3,,

GitHub - latinwordnet/latinwordnet-archive: Repository for archived Latin
WordNet data

Italian example:

abbracci abbraccio noun gen=m num=p

abbraccio abbraccio noun gen=m num=s

:lex_abbraccio a ontolex:LexicalEntry ;

lexinfo:gender lexinfo:masculine ;

lexinfo:partOfSpeech lexinfo:noun ;

ontolex:canonicalForm [ ontolex:writtenRep "abbraccio"@it ] ;

ontolex:morphologicalPattern :it-noun_002 .

:it-noun_002 a morph:subParadigm ;

morph:paradigm :it-noun .

:it-noun_002_pl a morph:rule ;

morph:inflectsFor [ lexinfo:number lexinfo:plural ] ;

morph:replacement [ morph:source "o$" ;

morph:target "" ] ;

morph:subParadigm :it-noun_002 .

:it-noun_002_sg a morph:rule ;

morph:inflectsFor [ lexinfo:number lexinfo:singular ] ;

morph:replacement [ morph:source "$" ] ;

morph:subParadigm :it-noun_002 .

Main issue that arised:

What kind of data is processed by the morph:Rule? As it is now, only strings
are processed but these are not interconnected to their respective morph:Morph
resources.

That means that in Stefania’s Latin example the resource :form_abdicatio_root
has to be discussed for its morphological status (is it really a root, then it
should be a morph:RootMorph or is it an ontolex:Form resource, then the “root”
should be excluded from the URI)

Is it possible to integrate the written representation strings of morph:Morph
resources into the morph:Rule and provide this option in addition to using
unrelated strings of the morphs an ontolex:Form consists of?

