Participants:

Bettina

Max

Fahad

eLex abstract for current model:

https://drive.google.com/open?id=1YpwdYZFZbM1utiVGaGvRLauuecTUq0yV

Example 1: driver (noun)

https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/driver#English

Representing the lexical entries of which a derived word (as a lexical entry)
consists:

ex:lex_driver a ontolex:LexicalEntry ;

proposal:consistsOfLexEntry ex:lex_drive , ex:lex_er .

consistsOfLexEntry for decomposing lexical entries, which can only consist of
other lexical entries (not of morphs).

Note: The elements of which a lexical entry consists should be also lexical
entries. Equivalently there could be a consistsOfMorphEntry object property for
stating of which morph resources ontolex:Form (i.e. wordforms in inflectional
paradigms) consist.

Stating that a derived word is derived from another (derived) word:

Ex:lex_driverless a ontolex:LexicalEntry ;

proposal:derivRel ex:lex_driver .

derivRel subPropertyof vartrans:lexicalRel

Note: The lexical entry in the subject slot is alway the derivative of the
lexical entry in the object slot.

Relating selected inflectional affixes to lexical entries (related to N12):

Suggestion 1 (Max): link the lexical entry to the whole inflectional paradigm:

ex:Bedingung proposal:hasParadigm prefix:paradigm_en-plural .

Suggestion 2 (Bettina): link the lexical entry to specific inflectional morphs:

ex:lex_driver proposal:lexicalMorph ex:suffix_s_plural .

lexicalMorph subproperty of ontolex:LexicalForm

Note: This property is suggested to enable the plain enumeration of selected
inflectional morphs that are usually directly given behind the headword
indicating with which affixes certain wordforms are built. It does not make any
statement about the exact position of the affix within the stem or potential
spelling or pronunciation changes that these affixes my cause to the stem.

Example 2: -er (suffix)

https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/-er#English

ex:lex_er a ontolex:LexicalEntry

In this Wiktionary entry 11 different meanings for this suffix are listed. This
is in accordance to the listing of meanings of a single lexical entry. Most of
the traditional dictionaries and existing lexical datasets are probably
designed like that. As a consequence, the decomposition of any lexical entry
that consists of the suffix -er will link to a generic non-disambiguated suffix
-er instance.

For more elaborate and fine-grained lexical datasets, however, the 11 different
meanings could be represented by separate suffix resources, hence, yielding 11
homonyms for -er. Then one could state that driver consists of the lexical
entry ex:lex_er_agent and, thus, disambiguate the meaning of the derivational
morph.

The morphology module should not prescribe whether derivational morphs should
be modelled in the traditional non-disambiguated way (one instance
corresponding to several meanings) or the fine-grained disambiguated way (one
instance corresponding to exactly one meaning). Both representations should be
possible but a usage note should clarify how both ways are to be realized by
using the morphology module (i.e. propose a convention for naming the URIs of
the 11 homonyms, e.g. by enumeration ex:lex_er_1 ect. or adding the meaning
ex:lex_er_agent, ex:lex_er_superlative ect.)

