Participants:

Bettina Klimek (BK)

Jakub Šimek

Julia Bosque-Gil (UZAR)

Katerina Gkirtzou (ARC)

Fahad Khan (CNR)

Stefania Racioppa (DFKI)

Matteo Pellegrini

 1.
        Module draft 4

[image1]

Changes in modulue draft 4:

  • 
        removed interrelations to decomp module (cf. decision of telco
        12.05.2021)

      □ 
            removed range morph:Morph of property decomp:subterm

      □ 
            removed range morph:Morph of property decomp:correspondsTo

  • 
        added domain morph:Morph, morph:StemMorph, morph:RootMorph to property
        ontolex:sense

  • 
        added domain ontolex:Form to property morph:consistsOf

  • 
        added class morph:WordFormationRelation (and removed subclass relation
        to vartrans:LexicalRelation) with subclasses morph:CompoundRelation and
        morph:DerivationRelation

  • 
        added class morph:Rule with subclasses morph:InflectionRule,
        morph:CompoundRule and morph:DerivationRule

  • 
        added morph:wordFormationRule with domain morph:WordFormationRelation
        and range morph:DerivationRule and morph:CompoundRule

  • 
        added classes morph:Paradigm, morph:InflectionType

  • 
        added object properties morph:hasParadigm, morph:inflects,
        morph:hasInflection, morph:example, morph:replacement

Adaptions of module draft 4 to be included for next telco:

  • 
        extend range of vatrans:source and vartrans:target with ontolex:Form
        and morph:Morph and domain with morph:morph:WordFormationRelation (or
        make this class a subclass of vartrans:LexicoSemanticRelation)? → yes,
        make this class a subclass of vartrans:LexicoSemanticRelation

  • 
        explicit representation of input and output part of speech for
        word-formation required (cf. LiLa WFL modeling) or is the statement of
        the pos of source and target lexical entry with lexinfo sufficient? →
        yes, sufficient

  • 
        correct subclass relations

  • 
        create morph:WordFormationRule as superclass subsuming
        morph:DerivationRule and morph:CompundRule

  • 
        remove ontolex:sense property between morph:Stem and morph:Root

 2.
        Representation needs modeling

modeled as draft:

N8: The morphosyntax of a language describes how the morphemes in a word affect
its combinatoric potential

BK proposal: allow ontolex:Form as input to generate new word-forms and as an
element of word-forms by extending the range of morph:consistOf with domain:
morph:Morph and ontolex:Form

N8 is about derivation, not inflection: finite tables can not be used to
represent Japanese word-forms because they are very productive

→ take N8 out of the RNs

N9: The phones making up a morpheme don’t have to be contiguous

BK proposal: This could be treated like suppletion, i.e. the grammatical
meanings and the lexical sense of the word-form is given with the lexinfo
vocabulary and ontolex:sense. If the phones are productive, they might actually
be infixes and then the word-form can be represented as all other word-forms
with an explicit order to allow an automatic generation of these word-forms as
well.

→ yes, these are infixes, remove N9

N10: The form of a morpheme doesn’t have to consist of phones

BK proposal: For the German example of Mutter-->Mütter, the affected morph is a
simulfix (= A simulfix is a change or replacement of vowels or consonants
(usually vowels) which changes the meaning of a word, e.g. "eat" in past tense
becomes "ate "tooth" becomes "teeth" when plural. http://www-01.sil.org/
linguistics/GlossaryOflinguisticTerms/WhatIsASimulfix.htm) and this is
considered under N2 already. The Lango example seems to also contain simulfix
morphs. Therefore, I propose to delete this modeling need and consider it as
covered under N2.

→ remove it

N11: Meanings of stems and roots

BK proposal: The description of meanings of stems and roots could be realized
in the same way as the description of meanings of lexical entries as given in
ontolex. For the representation of roots maybe external resources such as
Concepticon could be recommended or the possibility of a plain textual
definition could be established in addition.

Extend domain of ontolex:sense: domain: ontolex:LexicalEntry and
morph:StemMorph and morph:RootMorph

JMC: not in favour of extending ontolex:sense domain with morph:Morph, proposes
new property morph:sense with ontolex:LexicalSense and another Concept class

not modeled yet: → discussed in next telco

N5: Morphology crosses part-of-speech boundaries (derivation)

N12: Derivational Meanings

N6: Morphs linked to Lexical Entries

N7: Multiple segmentation strategies

