# Polysynthetic languages

Example: Inuktitut, an Eskimo-Aleutic language from the Eastern Canadian Arctic, official language in Nunavut (Canada). Our analysis is based on the Uqialaut analyzer. Uqailaut is an ad-hoc implementation in Java, but roughly equivalent to an FST implementation (as available for the closely related Kalaallisut language from Western Greenland). Inuktitut poses a number of unique challenges because of its extremely rich morphology. 

The Uqailaut Inuktitut data was originally included in the OntoLex-Morph GDrive and migrated to OntoLex-Morph GitHub on 2021-10-06.

## Inuktitut

Features; agglutination, assimilation, incorporation, polypersonal
agreement, head marking

-   Web demo analyzer (sample output):
    > [[http://www.inuktitutcomputing.ca/Uqailaut/Demo/demoword.php?lang=en&demoword=imiqtarvingmunngauliqhlutik]{.underline}](http://www.inuktitutcomputing.ca/Uqailaut/Demo/demoword.php?lang=en&demoword=imiqtarvingmunngauliqhlutik)

-   Morphological inventory:
    > [[http://www.inuktitutcomputing.ca/Technocrats/ILFT.php#morphology]{.underline}](http://www.inuktitutcomputing.ca/Technocrats/ILFT.php#morphology),
    > [[https://uqausiit.ca/morpheme-list/infix]{.underline}](https://uqausiit.ca/morpheme-list/infix)

-   We consider a single full form

## Modelling challenges

### 1. Encode ambiguity in derivation

- **sample**
	- [the word *atausiulugu*](atausiulugu.tsv): Verb feat. incorporation and polypersonal agreement, produced by Uqailaut analyzer
	- Necessary morphemes and allomorphs from parser: [atausiulugu.morphs.tsv](atausiulugu.morphs.tsv)
	- Root and derivational morphology from Spalding (1998): [atausiulugu.spalding.md](atausiulugu.spalding.md)

-   Many morphemes are ambiguous

-   It would be good to have a compact representation where all possible
    > segmentations are represented in a directed acyclic graph (DAG)
    > rather than as a sequence.

-   If not, we run into a combinatoric explosion, here;

    -   Given *abcedefg*

    -   If the sequence *bc* can always be analysed as either *b-c* or
        > *bc*

        -   

        -   *8,7,7,7,6,6,6,5*

    -   And the sequence *def* can always be analysed as either *d-e-f*
        > or *de-f* or *d-ef* or *def*

    -   And everything else is unambiguous

    -   Then a there are 2 \* 4 possible morphological analyses, with 52
        > (!) different morphological segments

    -   But as a DAG, this can be represented as one path (here using \|
        > to separate possible alternative sub-paths):

        -   *a-(b-c\|bc)-e-(d-e\|de-f\|de-f\|d-ef\|def)-g*

        -   This requires only 15 morphological segments (and clever
            > compression can reduce that a bit mit)


# not properly integrated yet


**Modelling challenges**:

-   allomorphy rules

-   Cardinality and type restrictions (vn morpheme requires verb and
    > produces n, \[most\] verbal morphemes cannot be final, etc.)

#### Incorporation (basically a verbal derivation from a noun):

{si:liq/2nv}

{u:u/1nv}

\[read: if applied to a noun, return a verb; number is number of lexical
entry for a particular lemma\]

#### Verb-to-verb derivations:

{si:si/2vv}

{si:siq/1vv}

{u:uq/3vv}

#### Verb-to-noun derivations:

{si:siq/2vn}

#### Noun-to-noun derivations:

{u:ut/2nn}

# FYI: Other data

Not for modelling but FYI

-   FYI: Corpus data (CoNLL data, not to be modelled, but the individual
    > morphemes and their combinatorics need to be modelled

\# Hansard

1 Hansard Hansard \_ \_

\# nunavut kanata

1 nunavut nunavut {nunavut:nunavut/1n} {Nunavut}

1 nunavut nunavut {nuna:nuna/1n}{vut:vut/tn-nom-s-1p} {(1) land (2)
country}{nominative: our (one thing to us many) }

1 nunavut nunavut {nuna:nuna/1n}{vut:vut/tn-nom-p-1p} {(1) land (2)
country}{nominative: our (many things to us many) }

2 kanata kanata {kanata:kanata/1n} {Canada}

\# nunavut maligaliurvia

1 nunavut nunavut {nunavut:nunavut/1n} {Nunavut}

1 nunavut nunavut {nuna:nuna/1n}{vut:vut/tn-nom-s-1p} {(1) land (2)
country}{nominative: our (one thing to us many) }

1 nunavut nunavut {nuna:nuna/1n}{vut:vut/tn-nom-p-1p} {(1) land (2)
country}{nominative: our (many things to us many) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{maligaliurvi:maligaliurvik/1n}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s} {legislative
assembly}{nominative: his;her;its (one thing, different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{maliga:maligaq/1n}{liur:liuq/1nv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{bill}{construction in progress: \'to be building s.t.\' (trans.: for
s.o.)}{place where the action of the verb takes place}{nominative:
his;her;its (one thing, different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{maliga:maligaq/1n}{li:li/3nv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{bill}{to build, make something (trans.: for s.o.); with certain words:
find s.t.}{frequentative: many subjects; many objects}{place where the
action of the verb takes place}{nominative: his;her;its (one thing,
different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{maliga:maligaq/1n}{li:lik/3nv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{bill}{to give, to provide, to offer, to fetch s.t. (trans.: to
s.o.)}{frequentative: many subjects; many objects}{place where the
action of the verb takes place}{nominative: his;her;its (one thing,
different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{maliga:maligaq/1n}{li:lik/2nv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{bill}{to go to; to have gone to; to come to; to find by
chance}{frequentative: many subjects; many objects}{place where the
action of the verb takes place}{nominative: his;her;its (one thing,
different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{maliga:maligaq/1n}{li:liq/3nv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{bill}{to go to, toward}{frequentative: many subjects; many
objects}{place where the action of the verb takes place}{nominative:
his;her;its (one thing, different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{maliga:maligaq/1n}{li:liq/2nv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{bill}{to provide, supply; to put s.t. (trans.: to, on
s.o.)}{frequentative: many subjects; many objects}{place where the
action of the verb takes place}{nominative: his;her;its (one thing,
different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{mali:malik/1v}{ga:gaq/2vv}{li:li/2vv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{(1) to follow (trans. \[-mik\]: s.o. or s.t.) (2) to obey (trans.
\[-mik\]: s.o.)}{frequentative: several times}{to make that s.t. or s.o.
\... (refl.: to become); to make s.t. (trans.: to s.o.)}{frequentative:
many subjects; many objects}{place where the action of the verb takes
place}{nominative: his;her;its (one thing, different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{mali:malik/1v}{ga:gaq/1vn}{li:li/3nv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{(1) to follow (trans. \[-mik\]: s.o. or s.t.) (2) to obey (trans.
\[-mik\]: s.o.)}{forms a noun with an inherently passive meaning:
someone/something that one \...}{to build, make something (trans.: for
s.o.); with certain words: find s.t.}{frequentative: many subjects; many
objects}{place where the action of the verb takes place}{nominative:
his;her;its (one thing, different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{mali:malik/1v}{ga:gaq/1vn}{li:lik/3nv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{(1) to follow (trans. \[-mik\]: s.o. or s.t.) (2) to obey (trans.
\[-mik\]: s.o.)}{forms a noun with an inherently passive meaning:
someone/something that one \...}{to give, to provide, to offer, to fetch
s.t. (trans.: to s.o.)}{frequentative: many subjects; many
objects}{place where the action of the verb takes place}{nominative:
his;her;its (one thing, different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{mali:malik/1v}{ga:gaq/1vn}{li:lik/2nv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{(1) to follow (trans. \[-mik\]: s.o. or s.t.) (2) to obey (trans.
\[-mik\]: s.o.)}{forms a noun with an inherently passive meaning:
someone/something that one \...}{to go to; to have gone to; to come to;
to find by chance}{frequentative: many subjects; many objects}{place
where the action of the verb takes place}{nominative: his;her;its (one
thing, different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{mali:malik/1v}{ga:gaq/1vn}{li:liq/3nv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{(1) to follow (trans. \[-mik\]: s.o. or s.t.) (2) to obey (trans.
\[-mik\]: s.o.)}{forms a noun with an inherently passive meaning:
someone/something that one \...}{to go to, toward}{frequentative: many
subjects; many objects}{place where the action of the verb takes
place}{nominative: his;her;its (one thing, different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{mali:malik/1v}{ga:gaq/2vv}{li:liq/1vv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{(1) to follow (trans. \[-mik\]: s.o. or s.t.) (2) to obey (trans.
\[-mik\]: s.o.)}{frequentative: several times}{on-going action; present
progressive tense}{frequentative: many subjects; many objects}{place
where the action of the verb takes place}{nominative: his;her;its (one
thing, different person) }

2 maligaliurvia maligaliurvia
{mali:malik/1v}{ga:gaq/1vn}{li:liq/2nv}{ur:uq/3vv}{vi:vik/3vn}{a:nga/tn-nom-s-4s}
{(1) to follow (trans. \[-mik\]: s.o. or s.t.) (2) to obey (trans.
\[-mik\]: s.o.)}{forms a noun with an inherently passive meaning:
someone/something that one \...}{to provide, supply; to put s.t.
(trans.: to, on s.o.)}{frequentative: many subjects; many objects}{place
where the action of the verb takes place}{nominative: his;her;its (one
thing, different person) }
